That's what I expected.
>>Hello, hello.
Hey, Charlie.
>>Hey.
>>Welcome.
Welcome to the YouTube stream for the moment.
And happy to have everyone here who is live and just
in a second on the podcast.
Excited to be back together.
>>Yeah, thanks so much for having me back on the show.
I really appreciate it.
>>Yes, it's really great to have you back on the show.
You and your team are doing awesome work these days.
And you're making a big dent in Python.
>>Thank you.
Thank you.
Hopefully a good dent, I guess.
>>Yeah, I guess you could make a good dent or a bad dent.
But no, I meant that in a good way.
Definitely in a good way.
>>I appreciate it.
>>Yeah.
Yeah, I think excellent work.
It's really-- it's kind of surprising
how some of these tools just come in and just catch fire
in a way.
I don't know how you felt about it,
but it seemed more than I would have expected.
I mean, I did not expect your things to be popular,
but they became really popular really quickly.
>>Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, it was different with Ruff and with uv.
The sort of context around it has been pretty different.
Because with Ruff, when I started working on Ruff,
no one knew who I was or had any reason
to care about what I was doing.
And the project just grew over time.
And then I knew that when we were working on UV,
there would just be a lot more of an expectation
around anything we build.
>>Yeah, the spotlight was already shining, right?
>>A little bit, yeah.
And that's awesome, because it means our stuff gets traction.
Also, it comes with a lot of responsibility.
It means anything we release, we're
kind of committed to maintaining.
So it's been very interesting, this kind of release cadence
versus what happened with Ruff.
>>Well, you have more people behind the scenes
helping you out, right?
>>I do, yeah, thankfully.
That's another--
>>Yeah, tell us-- maybe that's a good place to just kick off
our conversation is--
we're going to talk a bit about Ruff for everyone.
And Ruff was the thing that really launched all of this.
But you started a company, Astral.
You've got some funding behind it, building awesome tools.
Yeah, just give people the broad view of your world these days.
>>Yeah, totally.
So yeah, this all started when I released Ruff probably
like a year and a half ago maybe at this point.
And at that point, it was really not just a side project for me,
but very much an exploratory project.
Like I was kind of curious about building faster Python tooling
really, and curious about getting better at Rust
and all this stuff.
And Ruff, when I released it, it was a linter--
or it is a linter.
But it kind of brings a lot of different tools together.
So if you're familiar with Flake 8 or Pylint, but also Black,
Ruff is designed to kind of bundle all those tools
together.
So it can detect problems with your code.
It can fix them automatically.
It can reformat your code.
So often when we see people adopting Ruff,
they're replacing like 20 or 30 tools with Ruff.
And there's a bunch of nice things about it.
But ultimately, it's very, very fast, and hopefully
a lot simpler for users.
But-- go ahead.
>>I was going to say, it's really nice
that it's just one tool that brings that all together.
It's not a patchwork.
Here's how we use isort.
And here's how we use Flake 8.
And here's how we use this.
And here's how we use that.
>>Right, I think isort's a really good example.
Because instead of having a-- and isort's a great tool.
But instead of having a separate tool to do your import sorting,
Ruff frames import sorting as just a lint rule.
And so you don't have to learn a bunch of different tools
and figure out how to merge them together.
And Ruff, again, when I released it, it was just a side project.
And it sort of took off.
There were-- it was originally--
I released it in part because I had this thesis
that Python tooling could be much faster.
And Ruff was meant to evidence that.
It was meant to be an example of what I saw as this potential
to build really different Python tooling.
And took off a couple big projects, like FastAPI and such,
were kind of early adopters.
And it just grew and grew and grew from there.
And I started a company, Astral, shortly after,
based on a lot of these ideas.
So again, Ruff, in this context, was meant to be--
the goal wasn't necessarily to start a company just
based around Ruff.
The goal was to start a company based around the ideas
behind Ruff, which is, can we build really different Python
tooling by--
well, it's all written in Rust.
It's sort of an implementation detail.
But ultimately, what we're trying to do
is build really high-performance Python tooling,
but also tooling that works together really well
and simplifies things.
So tackle-- it's not just about performance.
It's also about tackling a lot of, I guess,
what I see as the complexity in Python tooling today.
And really trying to, I guess, challenge certain status
quos and respect others, but challenge some status
quos in what it feels like to work with and use Python.
And so our focus as a company--
right now, we're very, very focused on our open-source
roadmap and our open-source tooling.
So that's Ruff, now UV, which we'll talk about in a bit.
And these are MIT-licensed, fully open-source tools
that we build.
And ultimately, our goal is to build and sell
paid services that integrate really well with the tooling
and are kind of the natural next thing you need when
you're building with Python.
So we'll never charge money for the tools themselves,
those remain free, permissively licensed.
But our goal is to kind of build--
imagine you're building with Python,
you need to deploy a web server.
There's a lot of things that you need naturally to do that.
So for people who are already using our tools,
what are the natural next things they need?
And how can we build really good services
on top of the tooling that just integrate with it really well?
So that's kind of the premise of the company.
There's really two focuses to the roadmap.
It's the open-source and the commercial.
And our goal is to have an incentive structure where
we're just continuously aligned to invest
a ton in the open-source and grow it as much as possible
in a really natural way.
So you're not going to do per line fix pricing.
You get a million line fixes a month free, and then--
no, I'm just kidding.
I think it's an awesome model.
And open-source, 10 years ago, it really
looked-- it was already super vibrant and super--
making huge dents in the space, right?
Really, a lot of people adopting it.
But I think there was kind of a funding side
that was a little bit missing.
I still remember, like, buy me a coffee type of links.
Like, send me $10 if you like this.
And that's just-- that's not a job.
That's hardly a hobby type of thing to get stuff done.
You can't have a team of people focused on it.
And it had traditionally really been around kind
of a beneficial--
I need to find a big tech company that's
willing to give me sufficient amount of time
to work on this project to sort of fund its existence.
Or maybe I'm a consultant, and I create Flask,
but I consult on Flask, that type of thing, right?
And I think it's just super positive to see
more direct ways people are making
open-source successful.
Yeah, I appreciate that.
I wish--
Yeah, I think--
I wish-- I sort of wish that there were more good examples
of that working.
There are some, for sure.
For me, it was pretty clear--
like, it was immediately clear to me
I needed to be working on Ruff full-time if I wanted
the project to succeed.
And that's kind of a microcosm of the bigger challenge, which
is we wanted to build--
we really wanted to professionalize
the building of the work on this project
and bring in more people to help build it.
And so ultimately, it's not-- obviously, it's not charity.
It is venture funding.
And ultimately, we need to build a business around the tooling
to make it sustainable.
But again, for me, I want the incentive structure
to be such that the open-source is obviously free,
open-source extremely permissively licensed,
and truly open-source.
We have tons and tons of contributors.
We have a huge community around it.
And I'm just glad that we've been
able to bring in more people to kind of supercharge
the development of it all.
So yeah, so I guess you touched on this before,
but we're now eight people.
So we've grown.
I guess a year ago, it was just me in March.
So over the past--
our first two team members joined actually
in March of last year, so almost exactly a year.
And yeah, we're completely distributed.
So we have people in US Pacific time all the way to Bangalore.
So we're just around the like open-source.
We're kind of all over the world and just building all this stuff
out in the open.
It's such a good fit to be a distributed company
as an open-source, with open-source roots,
because the tools of open-source,
in some degree for software in general,
but especially for open-source, is asynchronous,
semi-connected, kind of the zen of Git,
but for the way you work, right?
And it makes it super easy to hire just the most engaged
people, regardless of where they are,
rather than the people who are willing to commute to my office
in the office park.
Yeah, I would be pretty surprised
if a single person I've hired would have been willing to move
to New York, which is where I'm based.
So from that perspective, it was a no-brainer, which is--
and actually, multiple people we've hired,
our relationship with them started on the repo.
Yeah.
In Ruff itself.
And then almost everyone we've hired,
we discovered through open-source in some way
or had some relationship through open-source in some way.
Yeah.
So yeah, it's been a really--
it's also very much in the DNA of the company, which is--
we actually also intentionally try
to hire people who have been maintainers
and have a lot of experience with that, too.
We view that as a really important skill.
Yeah, that's excellent.
So we talked about Ruff.
One thing I do want to give a bit of a shout-out to
is--
I don't remember.
I think I found this on Mastodon.
I can't remember where somebody talked about it.
But one of the things that Ruff does--
one, it changes code, which is awesome.
I love your Ruff format story.
But it also just tells you, hey, this could be better.
You're violating PEP 8.
You're violating this other convention or even
a security thing, right?
But the why of that I think requires
a little bit of experience.
Why should I use this kind of loop
or that kind of comprehension over another?
People told me that who are much better
and have been doing this longer, I shouldn't do it.
Why?
When you have 700 rules, there's a lot of why.
And so you guys came up with this thing at docs.ashrull.sh/ruff/rules.
Put it in links.
That literally, for each one of these,
has a little example in what is good and what is bad
and when you should use it and so on.
You want to just tell people about this a bit?
I think it's a matter of--
Yeah, totally.
So we didn't have--
I mean, we obviously didn't have this
when we started the project.
And then we accumulated a lot of rules.
When we decided to add this, I think we already
had hundreds of rules.
And the motivation for the format
really comes from Clippy, which is the linter used in Rust.
And they have really--
Rust, in general, has a really good documentation culture.
And Clippy has this nice format, very similar to ours.
We've made some adjustments, but it's pretty similar around
how you document lint rules, like what's the motivation
and giving examples.
So we were like, all right, we want to do this.
And we just, over a very long period of time,
and a lot of contributors contributed
on this documentation.
But it took like six months or something, probably,
to document it all.
And now we require it for all rules,
so it's much easier to add going forward.
But it was a huge effort to add this.
And some of the explanations, too,
are very extensive and detailed with lots of references.
Yeah.
Yeah, I pulled one up for isort, unsorted imports,
which is error I001.
And it also talks about whether it can automatically fix it,
what this does, why is it bad.
So it says things like, consistency is good.
Use a common convention for imports
to make your code more readable in idiomatic or Pythonic.
And it just gives an example of bad, good.
Right, right.
I think that's nice.
Yeah, and we've started to put more stuff in here over time,
too.
Like in some cases, we let users apply automatic fixes that
aren't completely safe by opting in.
Like it might change the meaning of your code,
and you kind of need to be careful.
And so over time, we've started to document that here, too,
like rules that have unsafe fixes, why.
Like in what case might it break your code,
and what should you look out for.
So yeah, we want it to be a tool with really good--
like we're kind of inspired by Rust in this way,
because Rust has a really good documentation culture.
And also the Rust compiler itself
has really good error messages.
It's sort of famous for that.
Like when your code doesn't work,
it's really good at telling you why.
I mean, it doesn't always get it right,
but it has famously good error messages.
And that's something that we try and channel to,
like when we make changes to configuration,
like just putting extra effort into trying
to make those error messages and those hints helpful.
But yeah, it's a lot of work.
I appreciate that you called it out.
I'm sure it looks like a lot of work,
but it's one of those things that's--
where else are you going to get this knowledge, right?
I mean, I know you can go search for one at a time,
but in this aggregate, this is really good.
Right, right, right.
So Ruff will fix a lot of these things for you.
And one of the things that I like to do
is I just have it integrated into my editor these days.
So both with PyCharm and with VS Code,
if I just say format this document, that's Ruff format.
Nice.
Yeah, yeah.
So we have a VS Code extension, and it supports formatting,
auto fixing, all that kind of stuff.
And--
The PyCharm one's a--
the JetBrains one's a third party one, right?
Someone else decided to make that?
Yeah, the JetBrains one is by Udai.
And it's-- yeah, that's a community extension.
We're considering doing our own at some point
because there's a lot of demand for--
obviously, we have a lot of users who use the JetBrains
stuff.
I mean, I use it.
So we may do it and do our own at some point,
but there's a community maintained one right now.
And that's based on--
we have a language server.
So there's kind of an underlying piece of technology
that wraps Ruff that powers all of these editor integrations.
So you can also use that from NeoVim or Sublime Text or Emacs.
All of those editors support the LSP.
And so you can actually-- it's the same thing that
powers the VS Code extension.
That's wrapped in some VS Code specific stuff,
but it's the same piece of technology.
And we're actually rewriting that right now
to make it more natively integrated
into Ruff, which will let us do some cool things.
So it should get actually significantly better,
I think, over the course of this year,
because it's becoming more and more of a priority for us.
Yeah, cool.
The whole LSP thing is pretty interesting.
I think it's really opened up a lot of editors being better.
Yeah, it has.
And it made it-- from our perspective,
it made it way easier to build editor integrations
because we just built an LSP.
And then it works for everyone, almost.
The JetBrains stuff, it does support the LSP,
but I think only in the paid version,
not in the community version.
So there's some limitations around it.
But in general, if you support the LSP,
it's actually very easy to build editor integrations that
work with everyone, which is super, super useful.
Yeah, instead of rebuilding your own integration
for every single thing, which is not fun.
Yeah, it's a lot.
All right, well, let's talk about the main project here.
The main reason for being here today is uv.
Tell people what uv is.
This is your next big project, next big tool.
Yes, yeah.
We released uv a little under a month ago.
And this is something that I've wanted to do--
basically, since we started the company, I wanted to start--
I thought there was an opportunity
to build some really interesting tooling in Python packaging.
And uv is kind of the first milestone in that.
So UV, in its current form, it's designed
as a sort of drop-in alternative to pip, pip-tools.
If you use pip compile, pip sync, and virtual M.
So it takes those three tools and tries
to bundle them into one.
And so it can do things like, given a set of input
requirements, generate a requirements.txt file,
similar to what you'd get from pip compile.
You can do uv pip install-r requirements.txt,
UV pip install black.
So it's really intended right now to be a sort of--
it won't always-- we don't support absolutely 100%
of what pip does, but we try to be pretty close.
And so in many cases, the intention
is that people can basically drop in uv in their project
that uses pip today and get, in many cases,
very, very significant performance improvements.
So similar to Ref, some of the goals
we had for this project were, one,
it should be very, very fast.
And UV, it's really fast.
In particular, there's a benchmarks.md in here,
actually, if you want to click on that.
Now scroll up.
Like--
- Does that do it?
- Oh, yeah.
That works too, I guess.
That was smart of me.
Yeah, so it's really, really fast,
especially if you have things cached, which is pretty common.
So often on your machine, when you're doing pip install-r,
whatever, a lot of those packages,
you've probably installed them at least once before
on your machine.
Or maybe you deleted your virtual environment,
and you're recreating it with the exact same dependencies
or something like that.
UV is very, very well optimized for that case.
So if you have a package that you're
installing multiple times, the installation
is effectively free.
And it's also a lot more disk space efficient.
We store all of them in one place
and copy them into your virtual environment
so that you don't have many, many different copies
of the package too.
So this was all taking techniques and inspiration
from other ecosystems and other package managers
and kind of molding them to fit Python's model for how
packaging and dependencies work and all the specifications.
And so again, the end result is installing
into a virtual environment, a package
that you've already installed before is basically free.
And yeah, a lot of these things are just way, way, way faster.
Similar to Ruff--
Dramatically faster, yeah.
Yeah, and similar to Ruff.
It's good dramatically.
And I think it's worth pointing out that on one hand,
we all have an extra 10 seconds, right?
Or whatever.
But in the aggregate, all of these things
are just like little paper cuts over your day.
And so yeah, sure, I can format the code.
And I could use something nice and sure if it takes 20 seconds,
OK.
But then you stop running it because it's kind of a hassle
and you're in your flow.
And this is kind of the same way.
It's like, oh, I want to maybe see
if there's some new packages for this project
as I'm sitting down to work on it.
Like, OK, well, sit, wait for a pip compile to run.
And you wait, and you wait.
And then like, OK, now it's done onto the development version.
And it's just some of these things that are instant.
You just ask the question more, and it just
doesn't break your train of thought.
Totally.
I think there's maybe three different things that
come to mind here when we think about performance.
Yeah, OK, in this case, it may not
seem to change your life if you're going from one second
to 50 milliseconds.
But I think three things come to mind.
So one, for companies and large projects,
this can actually be a really big difference.
And so if you're at a company and you
have a big monorepo with a bunch of different subprojects
that all have requirements files and you
want to bump a dependency, at that point,
you're talking like 15-plus minutes for a command.
And so the larger the project gets,
obviously, the more performance matters and the more it
helps out.
And we're trying to build tooling
that can basically scale, I don't
know about to arbitrarily large projects,
but to large projects and useful for companies too.
The other thing I'd say is I think there's
something that happens.
When tools-- when you make something way faster,
it just changes a lot of the ergonomics
around what it's like to do things.
And so in this case, OK, so installing
into a virtual environment, a package that you've already
installed before, is free now.
And so how does that change things?
It's nearly instant.
So how does that change things?
So that means if you mess up your virtual environment
and have to delete it and recreate it,
it doesn't cost you anything.
It's totally ephemeral.
You can throw it away and recreate it any time.
And that's just a different--
it sounds small, but that's a different relationship
to virtual environments than before,
where it's like, OK, I created the virtual environment now.
Oh, no, my virtual environment's messed up.
I've got to recreate it.
We want to just change a lot of the dynamics
around some of those abstractions.
And then the other thing is, this performance budget--
or if you think of performance like a budget,
this buys us a lot of room.
And so the fact that we are so fast on some of these things
means that we can do things that otherwise
might be prohibitively slow.
And this is more forward-looking and for the future.
One thing that we're thinking about a lot right now
is this idea of resolving Python dependencies for many platforms
because--
it's a little bit complicated, but pip compile and pip and UV,
they're really designed to only work on the current Python
platform and the current Python that you're using.
So if you're on macOS and you run pip compile or uv pip
compile, it will give you dependencies
that are correct for macOS and your current Python version.
But they might be wrong on Windows because in Python,
you can have dependencies that vary based on things
like the current Python version or the current operating
system.
So one example would be uv loop for people
trying to speed up their--
I think it doesn't work on Windows.
It doesn't work at all on Windows.
That's right.
Yeah, so that's a very common one.
And it is, I think, very common that this is a very common
thing.
Lots of really, really popular packages
have these kinds of markers.
These are called markers, which basically
makes the dependencies conditional
based on the current Python.
And so again, like in pip and pip-tools,
UV right now just locks for the current Python.
Poetry and I think PDM, but Poetry for sure
does this very interesting thing where they actually
try to lock--
they try to resolve for all possible platforms.
And that's something-- it's really convenient
because it means that you do one lock,
and then any user anywhere can use that.
And it works.
And it's guaranteed to be right as opposed to maybe it
doesn't work on Windows or whatever else.
And so we're pretty interested in that, adding that behavior.
And that's going to be more expensive.
And so if we have something that's really fast right now,
it opens up a design space of interesting things
we can do to solve that problem while still being very fast.
So that's how I think about performance.
I think people a little bit underrate
how much of an impact it can have
on even small interactions.
Because once you try something that's much faster,
it's often hard to go back to the other thing.
But I'm glad you've had that experience at least.
Yeah, absolutely.
A couple of interesting comments.
Danny says, if it takes 10 seconds,
I go to triage that issue on GitHub
and come back five minutes later.
That's where I was getting at with the flow stuff.
Like, OK, I'm ready to--
mind wanders and you're starting over.
And then Henry out in the audience also says--
hey, Henry-- it also, doing things so quickly,
it encourages good environment usage.
Because if doing things the right way is just as easy
and as fast as doing it the wrong way,
you might as well do it the right way.
That's a nice thought.
Yeah.
It is.
Yeah, I mean, I think there are certain things,
though, where we aren't any faster.
And I am interested in thinking about those
and what we can do about them.
The most obvious one is, in Python,
sometimes when you install a dependency,
you might have to build it from source.
And in Python, you often are installing things like NumPy,
which includes some native code.
And so actually turning that into something
that your system can run is kind of expensive.
And you typically don't have to think about this with NumPy
because they ship what are called wheels, which are
like these pre-compiled artifacts.
But not all packages ship wheels.
You could be on a platform that doesn't have a wheel.
For a variety of reasons, you might get the raw NumPy source
code and then have to--
you get the raw NumPy source code
and then have to compile it down into a build distribution.
And for us, if we get into that situation,
it's not going to be any faster because we still
have to build the thing from source, just like--
That's the slowest part of the whole process.
Yeah, and so there are some cases and some bottlenecks
where I'm kind of thinking about how could we
do even better there?
And there are actually things that
are changing in the standards that
have made this a little easier.
There's this new thing called metadata 2.2.
It sounds cool, I know.
It basically lets you read the metadata.
You like metadata 2.1.
Yeah, I'm on-- yeah, we're actually on 2.3 now.
I'm just kidding.
But the point of that is it's a standard that
makes it so you don't have to build the thing as often.
If you just want to know the metadata of NumPy, for example,
you may no longer need to build it, and before you did.
And so the standards are moving in a helpful direction here.
But I just thought I'd call it out
because the source distribution-- there
are cases where it won't be faster.
And I'm pretty interested in those.
But people should know that they also exist.
It's not just time.
There's also security issues around that, right?
If things are still based on building source from source
and then running the setup py to see what the metadata is,
it's both slow and also potentially
running arbitrary code just to install a thing, which
can make you--
I mean, I don't know.
Rarely has anything gone wrong with just installing and running
arbitrary code off the internet.
But sometimes it could go wrong.
Yeah, it would be nice to get to a world
where that's not required, at least for dependency resolution.
And the standards are moving in that direction.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, you might-- if you're going to use it,
you're going to have to get it.
But if you just want to know, well,
what versions do I need to put these two things together,
you shouldn't have to do that.
Yeah, exactly.
Because today, for NumPy, for example,
if you didn't have a wheel, you would
have to run some arbitrary code to ask it for its dependencies.
Yeah, exactly.
Well, let's talk about some of the usages here.
I see some more interesting comments in the chat.
I'll get back to them.
First of all, is it like "Highlander," the movie?
Should there just be one?
Is uv a thing that I put into, say, my requirements file
if I want to use it?
Or do I install it just once for my machine?
What's the scale of UV?
So there's a lot of different ways.
You can-- there's a lot of different ways to install it.
You definitely can install it into a virtual environment.
My general recommendation would be
to install it on your machine once.
Because an interesting thing about UV
is you don't need Python to install it.
And it doesn't have--
you need to have Python on your machine,
because we need to be able to, for example,
build source distributions or know
where to install the thing.
We have to install into a virtual environment somewhere.
And so you have to have Python installed on your machine,
but uv does not depend on Python.
So it can install into arbitrary virtual environments
or into arbitrary other Python interpreters.
So that's why we generally recommend
using these standalone installers
that we have at the top of the snippet on the screen.
So they're like the curl and the PowerShell invocations.
Those will install a single binary
on your machine that's uv.
And from there, you can use uv to install
into virtual environments that it creates,
to install into your system Python, to do whatever.
So I would say most people, based on the statistics,
based on our download statistics,
most people still install uv with pip, which makes sense,
which is not that surprising to me.
But I would generally recommend having one UV
install on your machine.
Although if you do install into a virtual environment,
that's also totally fine.
Nothing's going to go wrong.
It's just not completely necessary
because a single uv can already install
into that virtual environment.
Right.
You're never going to import uv.
No.
You might, but in general, people are not going to.
I think you can.
I'm trying to think what would happen.
It's not like-- things like pytest and other things,
a lot of times there could be just one of those.
But then you want to use fixtures,
and you need to import something out.
So then it really needs to be in the virtual environment
and accessible, like a library.
But this is just something you run maybe even
before your virtual environment exists.
It really does ideally exist outside of it, I think.
Yeah, ideally it exists outside of it.
And there are some cases where you'd
want to install it within the virtual environment,
but ideally it exists outside of it.
The other thing that's nice about using
the standalone installers at the top here
is soon we're going to ship a self-update command.
So you can do uv self-update, and it will update UV
to the latest version.
And we can't really support that if you install it
with a different package manager like pip or brew.
Those have their own upgrade commands, obviously.
But if you install it with our installer,
then we can control the upgrades and stuff like that
and provide some other features.
So that's generally what we recommend.
But obviously, we're always going
to support installing with pip and stuff too.
Yeah, I'm all about pipx these days.
I really like--
Yeah, we're pipx.
That's mine.
Yeah, yeah, pipx really--
you can just say, kind of like brew,
you can say upgrade all my Python CLI tools.
pipx upgrade all.
Basically, I find rough and uv is just--
you guys are moving super fast, and there's frequently
an update.
There are often updates, yeah.
Yeah, and then the uv interface, it's
meant to be pretty familiar to-- or it's meant to be,
I guess, hopefully very familiar to people who have used--
who are already using pip and other tools.
And so UVVM creates a virtual environment.
And then we have this pip subcommand,
so uv pip install flask.
And that doesn't call or use pip in any way.
We're just using pip here to convey
what the interface looks like.
And part of the motivation there is, at some point
in the future, we probably want to add a new interface to UV
that's a little bit more high level.
So you could think of something like Poetry,
where they have Poetry install.
They have this sort of higher level interface
for interfacing with packages.
We want to do something like that.
And so that's why we left the top level of the interface
clear, because we might kind of like integrate and--
sorry, innovate and ship a bunch of stuff that would otherwise
break this interface.
So by putting this stuff under pip,
we basically created this isolated space
where we can make sure that those commands keep
working no matter what we choose to change in the future.
And it's very similar to pip's interface.
It's pip install.
And then it could be a package name.
It could be a -r requirements file.
We support editable installs.
We support URL dependencies, get dependencies,
all that kind of stuff.
All the stuff you might normally do,
pip install something, for the most part, that's the same.
Yep, yeah, exactly.
And we support a lot of the same flags, too,
that pip supports.
So like --index URL, --extra index URL,
like --null binary, all that stuff.
We don't support every flag, but we've
put a lot of effort into supporting a lot of them.
And we've added more over time.
Now we support --null build isolation and stuff
like that that maybe most listeners have never even
had to look at.
But these things matter in some circumstances.
And so over time, our goal is to add more of the interface.
But I would say for common use cases,
I would expect that it just works.
Just adding uv up front, it should just work.
Now as you become more complex, it won't.
And you'll run into some--
we have a whole document of subtle ways that we deviate.
Some are intentional.
Some I consider bugs, like some we want to fix over time.
But the intention is that for most people,
we want it to just work.
Once we fix the first round of bugs following the release,
of course.
Yeah, yeah, sure.
So you've got a UVVENV, VEMP, for Creative Virtual
Environment.
And it has a lot of the flags that Python-MVENV would have,
where you can say, bring along pip, or upgrade things,
or set the prompt name, that kind of stuff, right?
Yep, yeah, exactly.
Yep.
Similar for UV, pip, and then stuff.
What I find I do for most of my work,
at least if I'm not trying to teach or do a presentation,
where people are like, what did you just do?
Is I'll have kind of aliases, right?
Like UV, pip, install-r requirements on TXT
is just PIR, pip install requirements.
Things like that, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And so I try to just take the common stuff.
And it doesn't matter if it's pip or uv really backing it
from my CLI ergonomics, right?
I use my alias.
And if I want to change that, I just go and edit it.
So for me, it was super easy to switch to adopt these things,
because I'm like, I edit my ZSH RC file once,
and now I just do the same stuff.
And it works, but the new way, way faster.
Yeah, and the goal of pip compatibility
has been interesting, because there are actually
some things that we very intentionally
want to do differently.
And I won't speak for the pip maintainers,
but I think in some cases, there are probably things
that they would do differently too, if they could.
I think so too, yeah.
Yeah, because pip, I mean, pip is extremely important.
And its number one goal is it needs to be robust, right?
It needs to keep working.
And it needs to be compatible, because it's truly
the cornerstone of a lot of the Python ecosystem.
And so pip, it's harder for them to change things, especially
in a breaking way.
And they have to be really thoughtful
and do that over a long period of time.
And so we're in kind of a privileged position, honestly,
because we come in with a new tool.
We can actually choose to do things differently.
And some people get upset about it,
obviously, because they're like, this
isn't exactly how pip does it.
I'm trying to hold firm on some of those things
and also be open-minded on others, right?
But one thing that we do that's different, that's--
I guess maybe it's not evident from this screen exactly.
Or I guess it sort of is.
So when you do uvvmv, we default to the name .vmv.
So if you don't provide a name, we just default to .vmv.
And there was a PEP to make that a standard that
got pulled back.
But it's not like we're trying to make it a standard.
But I just think it's a good default.
We want to abstract away some of this stuff.
And so you can just have a virtual--
you can obviously pass a name if you want, but we default to .vmv.
That's different from other tools.
And then the other thing is, when you do uvpip install,
by default, we require a virtual environment.
And so if you do uvpip install flask
and there's no virtual environment, we'll error.
And it doesn't have to be active.
We'll look for it in the current directory,
even if it's not active.
So if you do uvvm, then uvpip install flask, it will work.
And in my opinion, it will do the intuitive thing,
which is it will install into the environment
in the current directory.
So it's trying to provide--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Like if I'm a little farther down, it'll go and say, oh,
just--
oh, that's amazing.
Exactly.
So it'll find the virtual environment
in the current directory or any parent directory.
So for me, that's just a nice default workflow
that encourages virtual environments
and doesn't get in your way about it.
And we do have a flag for installing
outside virtual environments.
But the difference is, in UV, you
have to opt in if you want to do something like install
into the system Python.
It's a very virtual environment first
while abstracting away a lot of the details
of virtual environments.
So there are things like that where we need attention
decisions.
[LAUGHTER]
In my opinion, yeah.
Yeah.
And I think-- and it's nice because we
can start with that behavior.
And we're in a privileged position
because we can start with different defaults.
Yeah, for sure.
So if I do a UVVNV for a virtual environment,
then maybe I uv pip install something.
But then I forget and I pip install something else.
Does it break?
Is it OK?
As in the third time there's no UV?
Well, yeah, exactly.
So I'm in uv pip install something, uv pip install that.
And I just, oh, I forgot this thing.
I just pip install.
Oh, I forgot the uv.
So it's--
No, it shouldn't break.
So let's say you activate the virtual environment.
Yeah, it's already activated.
OK, cool.
So you do UVVNV, you activate the virtual environment,
you do uv pip install flask, and then you
do pip install black or whatever.
Yeah, something, yeah.
That should work just fine because the thing
that we ultimately create in the virtual environment,
that's all based on standards.
So the stuff that we do in the virtual environment
to install packages, it should look roughly indistinguishable
from what pip would do.
And it's totally interoperable with pip.
So similarly, if you did pip install and then pip install
flask and then uv pip uninstall flask,
that would work correctly.
Pip would install flask and we would remove it.
Because everything that pip and UV
are doing in the virtual environment
is based on standards.
So the way that we add and remove packages,
all that kind of stuff, it should be totally interoperable
with other tools.
OK, cool.
PyPI is pretty good at having analytics
around what packages are being downloaded, what's popular,
what platforms.
Do you do anything like send a user agent or something
so that people could answer the question, well,
how many people are using straight pip
and how many people are using uv in a year?
Yeah, we sent a uv user agent.
And right now, it's just uv in the uv version.
There's an open issue in the repo
from Pradyan, who works on pip, that
outlines all this stuff that pip includes in its own user
agent, which we want to add.
Which is pretty interesting.
I actually didn't know this.
So pip and its user agent includes a lot of things
about the current Python platform.
Data that they use in PyPI basically to inform decisions.
Like, oh, no one's using--
I don't think this is actually how it's used,
but just an example.
Oh, no one's using Python 3.7 anymore.
Let's lower priority on that because no one's
installing Python with Python 3.7.
And so we want to add-- we don't have that right now.
We're planning to add it.
But yeah, it will be interesting to see.
We can get statistics over time, too, on uv and pip
and how common they are in different dimensions.
Yeah.
One thing that would be kind of fun to have is--
I'm not sure if it's at all interesting to you,
but to have some kind of cron job or background thing,
if you just interact with UV, if it kind of kicked off
sort of a background process that did its thing.
But take the history of maybe the top 500 packages
plus the ones you've used and just kind of keep a cache
up to date on your system.
So if you're on an airplane or you're in a coffee shop
or for some reason the internet's not great,
it's kind of pre-filled the cache and everything's there.
And then kind of--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
That might be fun.
Yeah, we do have a dash offline flag, which will--
it forbids network requests, obviously.
But it'll try and do the full install
without accessing the network.
Yeah, that's cool.
It would be cool to pre-fill the cache.
Yeah, it's just like if you're a uv user
and you sit down on your computer and for some reason
the internet's out, I'm at a conference, I'm doing a talk,
and it's got the dreaded, terrible conference Wi-Fi.
It's not the end of your demo.
It's just like, yeah, see how fast this is?
It's amazing.
Yeah, it's actually funny because the benchmarking,
like when we do benchmarks, benchmarks
can just vary so dramatically based on internet connectivity.
That is often the bottleneck.
I mean, it's clearly not always the bottleneck
because we're able to be faster than other tools.
So if it was always the bottleneck,
I don't think that wouldn't really be true.
But it matters a lot.
And so sometimes I'll throw on macOS,
they have a tool called Network Link Conditioner.
So you can actually force--
Like drag your network down.
Yeah, you can force it down.
And the categories are like--
it's not literally called bad mobile phone or something,
but that's basically what it is.
Yeah, it's like very lossy edge network.
Like those are the pre-built--
it's pretty funny, but it is actually--
that's a very helpful thing for benchmarking.
Sometimes actually, if you have a really good network
connection, sometimes it's actually helpful to set that
anyway to a pretty good level because then at least it
will be very consistent across your executions.
Anyway, it's something I've learned over time.
Yeah, that is super interesting.
So one of the things I think is interesting to consider here
is obviously this is way faster.
I saw some of the announcements and some of the discussion
around the announcements, and the people
were really surprised how fast this is.
And I don't think Rust is the full answer.
You tell me if I'm wrong.
But one part, obviously, making the code run ultra fast,
that is an important part of it.
But it also seems like you all have rethought
some of the internal algorithms and some of the caching
and some of the ways things work,
maybe with a fresh take on it, where you're not constrained
by the way it's been done for many, many years.
So what elements are at play to make it as fast as it is?
Is it just Rust, or is it something else?
So Rust is important.
But the way I typically frame it is
that Rust is kind of like an enabler to writing
really fast programs.
It forces you to slash lets you care about certain things that
matter a lot for performance that, in Python,
there's actually just no way to care about them.
I'm talking specifically here about memory allocation.
In Python, that all just kind of happens.
In Rust, you're forced to think about,
am I going to allocate memory here or not?
And when is it going to be deallocated
and all that kind of stuff?
And so that unlocks the ability to care and be really careful
in how you manage it.
So Rust is a really important-- Rust
is an important part of the success story here.
But I think it's really--
I think it would be really very incorrect to say
that it's all about Rust.
And it's not a Rust versus Python thing.
Right.
If we could just recompile pip with--
Yeah, so if you took--
--with Cython or something, boom, it would just be--
no, it wouldn't be as big of a deal, right?
If you took pip and just rewrote it line by line as close
as you could in Rust, it would probably be faster than pip.
But it would not be nearly as fast as uv.
We just do a lot of things differently.
And part of, I guess, evidence for this,
too, is throughout the development of UV,
there were multiple pull requests
that sped up uv as a whole by 30% to 50%.
So what does that say?
That says that there's lots of different--
those were all Rust programs.
So we were able to write the same Rust program many times,
optimizing it more and more and more.
And so there's so much engineering
that went into making it fast.
Some of it's how the cache is designed.
That was a really important piece.
And that's actually something that pip could also do.
And I think it's possible a good outcome here, actually,
is that pip is able to take some of these changes
and incorporate them over time.
And we are kind of the guinea pig for that.
We're going to change user expectations a little bit
about how the cache is set up.
We're going to run into bugs about platform compatibility.
We're going to run into bugs based on this cache design.
And hopefully, that could, at some point,
help inform pip if they choose to redesign their cache this
way.
The cache design is a really big thing.
And then just a lot of profiling the program,
figuring out what the bottleneck is,
and then solving the bottleneck, and just
really intense engineering work that was not me,
but was other people on the team to optimize some of that.
A good example is--
it's OK, it sounds silly.
But we found that a bottleneck--
when all the data is cached and you're
trying to do a resolution, so there's no network requests,
everything's local, one of the bottlenecks
that we kept running into was parsing and comparing
versions, version specifiers.
So in Python, when you have a requirements file,
you have FastAPI is greater than version 1 or whatever.
And then in the FastAPI file, you
have FastAPI version 1.0.0, blah, blah, blah.
So parsing those, and then we were comparing those,
we were doing comparisons between version markers
so many times, because it was just a constant thing
in dependency resolution.
It's like, can I use this dependency?
Well, does it fit to this range?
So Andrew Gallant from our team rewrote that parser
in the version comparison specifier.
And it's one of the most incredible pull requests
I've ever seen.
Every commitment is so interesting.
And he optimized it so massively that it was like,
he's basically representing the version in the end by a 64-bit--
like a U64 integer.
Comparisons is just like, compare the two integers.
And there was just so much engineering that went into it.
And it sped up the cache case by 30%.
And so there's just a lot of engineering that went into it.
And again, it's harder for pip to do some of those things,
because the codebases, they have actual users to support.
We were able to do this before we launched publicly.
We could break things.
We can do things.
We can make massive changes to the codebase
in short periods of time.
So we're in kind of a privileged position
to be able to really optimize the performance like that.
But it's a big part, culturally, of what we wanted to do, too.
It's like, we're going to make this thing extremely fast.
>>Yeah, I'm seeing also interesting secondary effects.
Talks and not-- nots?
I think that's talks.
Talking about using it, making it faster.
Just now, I hear Henry says, build 1.1 is faster
from looking at uv.
And the next version will also add uv as an installer choice,
which is pretty impressive.
>>Yeah.
That's been a really cool--
that's actually something I didn't really anticipate.
And I'm really glad has happened,
which is that there's a little bit of--
we ended up building something pretty modular.
And so there's been a little bit of--
or a lot of integrations with uv that people have been building.
Bernat had the talks uv thing that was out within a week,
I think, which was use uv to power talks in different ways.
Yeah, Knox, I think, supports it, build, type a/build.
I've talked to the Hatch maintainer.
He's pretty interested in making UV
like an optional back end for Hatch.
So that's really cool to me, because it's all just
magnifying the impact.
And again, I don't know how much of that I anticipated.
But it's really cool to see that you could plug it
into these other tools, and they can just get much faster.
So I don't know.
I mean, that's actually been a big highlight
from the release, honestly, has been the reception
from other maintainers of other tools
who have been excited to integrate it in different ways.
Because it's just not--
that just didn't happen.
Rough wasn't nearly as much of a fit for that kind of thing.
There just aren't as nearly-- there are some,
but it's just not as natural to have integrations
with Rough in that way.
But for UV, it makes a lot of sense.
And it's been really cool to see.
>>Yeah, UV's more of a building block than Rough is.
Rough fits in editors and CI and stuff.
Yeah, OK.
>>Yeah, and there were other tools.
But yeah, it's mostly an end user thing and not a library,
I think.
>>Right.
All right, so a couple of interesting things
out in the audience.
Let's knock them out.
OK, so Tushar asks--
this is, I think, a big tension that's
building in the Python packaging space is,
do packaging tools use Python to do stuff?
Or do the packaging tools control the Python?
Who is controlling whom here?
So Tushar asks, will uv also install Python sometime soon?
Can I just express, hey, I want to use 3.12 on this
and these dependencies?
>>Yeah, we almost certainly want to do this.
I don't think it will be-- it won't be required.
You can still use your own Python.
But we almost certainly want to add Python bootstrapping.
So that's another reason why the dream workflow is you
use the standalone uv installer.
Because then it's like it will actually
install Python for you, too.
And so the reason--
so then it's like you don't have to have Python on your machine
basically to start being productive with uv.
It can just bootstrap the environment for you.
And we can also do--
yeah, it would just be nice if you did pip compile,
like uv pip compile, --Python 3.13 or something.
And then we just bootstrapped Python 3.13
and did the resolution on your machine.
That's kind of the workflow that we're trying to build towards.
>>Since you're so UV-centric as well,
it could be UV, VNV, --version.
>>Yeah, 100%.
>>3.12 or whatever.
>>And we bootstrap that.
Yeah.
If you've got it cached, you just give it.
And if you don't, then you get it on the machine.
>>Exactly.
>>Yeah.
>>Yeah, so we'll definitely do this.
Again, I do think it's important that it's not required
to use the uv Pythons.
We actually kind of had to do a minimal version of this
for our CI and testing.
But it was a Bath script, and then I
think it became a Python script.
But eventually, it would be built into uv.
>>Yeah.
>>Yeah, yeah.
I think that would be really--
>>Yeah, I think it'll be super cool.
>>--really quite awesome.
>>Yeah, I think it will be too.
Let's see.
Tushar also says, loves that the --require VNV.
>>Yep.
>>As a thing.
He thinks it'll become the default, and also points out,
for those who don't UV, that pip require
virtual V as an environment flag is in your RC files.
It's pretty nice.
I need to do that just the other day.
>>Yeah, you can--
>>You can configure that.
>>No, I spelled that to the wrong spot.
>>Yeah, so pip can be configured to require virtual ends.
>>Yes.
>>Yeah, I did something weird.
I'm actually looking at my terminal
behind our shared screen, our meeting here.
And my prompt says global VNV.
And so one of the things that I do is I have a--
just if I log it, if I open up my terminal,
it already has an activated virtual environment that's
in my system.
So I can just say, hey, I'm going to create a virtual environment
that's in my system.
And I can just say, hey, I'm going to create a virtual environment
>> Yeah, there was an amazing-- it's not a joke,
but it's, I guess, something that's a prank that somebody came up with.
Here, I'll put it on the screen.
It's called "When Everything Becomes Too Much,"
the NPM package chaos of 2024.
And I was just-- as you were talking about Node modules,
this is more of a--
>> Oh, my gosh.
I haven't seen this.
>> It's amazing.
So it's more of a statement of, well, how super interdependent
or how many combinatorial or transitive dependencies
does a couple of NPM things have?
Like, for example, I used Tailwind, but there was maybe 50 things
in my Node module for just using Tailwind in my project, right?
So anyway, this one is-- an NPM user named PatrickJS
launched a troll campaign where a package called "Everything,"
it depended on every other NPM package.
So if you NPM install everything,
then it literally tried to download the repository.
>> Yeah, that's kind of amazing.
Wow.
>> I know.
It's devious, but it's also kind of like, okay, that's something else.
>> Yeah, Python dependency trees tend to be much shorter, I guess,
and smaller.
You tend to have way fewer dependencies.
They are sometimes heavier, I guess, because in Python,
it's very common to have lots of native code.
And I don't know, like PyTorch, the PyTorch wheels that you download
when they're zipped are between 100 and 200 megabytes.
>> Wow, okay.
>> Yeah, yeah, all the ML stuff and all the native stuff,
those are big, but the number of dependencies tends to be a lot smaller.
>> Yeah, I totally agree.
>> It's also very common to ship foundational packages
with no dependencies or very few dependencies,
which is very hard to do in JavaScript.
>> Yeah, it is.
It definitely is.
All right, I think we're getting short on time here.
I think I probably should let you go back and knock out another release of uv.
>> I do have a new release today.
Okay, thank you.
>> Awesome.
Cool.
So Tony, the audience, has been using uv in production for a couple weeks now.
Awesome, seems very excited about it.
And also, I have too.
It's an absolute delight.
It hasn't--
>> Oh, thank you so much.
>> Yeah, I know there are certain things that it didn't do right away,
but then it came out and you added it quickly.
I know there was some criticism for you all for developing this in private
and then releasing it, and I just want to say, like, you know,
thanks for doing that.
And what's the alternative?
Maybe start with just a blank GitHub repo and people start to--
"Well, you should do this.
You should be doing that."
Like, "We have a vision.
Let us just, like, get a little structure in place and then we'll open source it.
Like, give us a month, you know?"
So I don't know.
I think it's excellent work you're doing.
>> I appreciate it.
I appreciate it.
Yeah, yeah.
You know, like I said at the start, it's different this time because anything we release, like--
>> You could work on a rough for a month and nobody cares until it starts to catch some traction, right?
But this is the instant that it hits GitHub.
>> Yeah, we knew people would at least look at it and at least try it.
And I think, you know, we wanted to make sure that whatever we released,
first of all, was good, and second of all, that we were ready to maintain it.
And I think with packaging, too, it's like there's just a lot of--
it's just such a complex space that, like, I wanted to make sure that we had a lot of clarity
in the messaging around what the tool is and what it's not and, like, what we want it to be
and what it isn't yet.
And so I'm really happy with how the launch went, and I've really appreciated just all the excitement,
activity, engagement that we've had on the repo.
It's been, like, I don't know.
I mean, honestly, it's been a lot of work.
But it's, like, really, really-- no, but it's awesome.
It's, like, so energizing for me and for the team.
And to see all the people picking it up and making it the foundation of their projects.
And, yeah, it's really cool.
Yeah, and it's cool.
You know, I guess another-- like, one other thing that's a little different this time is, like,
I just talked to more people who work on Python tooling at companies now than I did
when I released Ruff, just because over the course of the past year,
I've just met a lot of people, and we've just talked about how they're using Ruff,
how they're not, and so just hearing some of those stories, too,
of how, like, companies are starting to use it and, like, what the blockers are
and, like, how much of a speedup it's providing has been pretty cool to see, too.
So, yeah, I appreciate it, though.
Yeah, you're welcome.
All right, we'll leave with this final thought from Juan.
I installed 94 libraries in around two seconds.
Incredible.
That's great.
All right.
Yeah.
All right, well, I'm excited to see where things go, and, you know,
we'll maybe do a follow-up when you've got some more of the ideas in place.
Yeah, sounds great.
No, it's always a pleasure.
Thanks so much for having me on.
I really appreciate it.
Yeah, thanks, Charlie.
See you later.
Thanks, everyone, for listening.
Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]